NEP-366: Meta transactions (#366)
near/NEPs: neps/nep-0366.md

---
NEP: 366
Title: Meta Transactions
Author: Illia Polosukhin <ilblackdragon@gmail.com>
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/366
Status: Draft
Type: Protocol Track
Category: Runtime
Created: 21-Jun-2022
---

## Summary

In-protocol meta transactions allowing for third-party account to initiate and pay transaction fees on behalf of the account.

## Motivation

NEAR has been designed with simplicity of onboarding in mind. One of the large hurdles right now is that after creating an implicit or even named account the user does not have NEAR to pay gas fees to interact with apps.

For example, apps that pay user for doing work (like NEARCrowd or Sweatcoin) or free-to-play games.

[Aurora Plus](https://aurora.plus) has shown viability of the relayers that can offer some number of free transactions and a subscription model. Shifting the complexity of dealing with fees to the infrastructure from the user space.

## Rationale and alternatives

> Proposed here design provides the easiest for users and developers way to onboard and pay for user transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed design here provides the easiest way for users and developers to onboard and to pay for user transactions.
```

nit: grammar

> There is no requirement on the user account, including user account may not even exist on chain and implicit account can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are no requirements on the user account.  The user account may not even exist on the chain and an implicit account can be used instead.
```

nit: grammar

> An alternative is proxy contracts deployed on the user account.
> This design has severe limitations as it requires user to deploy such contract and additional costs for storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative is to use proxy contracts deployed on the user account.
This design has severe limitations as it requires the user to deploy such contracts and incur additional costs for storage.
```

## Specification

The main flow of the meta transaction will be as follows:

>  - User will sign `DelegateActionMessage` specifying set of actions that they need to be executed. It also includes specific relayer to ensure secure execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - User signs a `DelegateActionMessage` specifying the set of actions that they need to be executed. It will also specify a relayer to ensure secure execution.
```

>  - User sends signed `DelegateAction` data to the relayer

Reviewer 2: Does a user send `DelegateAction` data to the relayer out off-chain?

Reviewer 2: What is the advantage of having two structures: `DelegateActionMessage` and `DelegateAction`? A user can send `DelegateActionMessage` to the relayer and the realyer can add `DelegateActionMessage` to the transaction as an action. I think, this is simpler.

Reviewer 3: +1 for explaining more clearly the role of the two messages.

Reviewer 3: also - does user send a DelegateAction or DelegateActionMessage (based on context, I think it is the latter - as this is the one that was created in the previous point)

>  - User sends signed `DelegateAction` data to the relayer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - User sends the signed `DelegateAction` data to the relayer
```

>  - Relayer forms a `Transaction` with `receiver_id` equal to the user's account and `actions: [DelegateAction { ... }]`, and signs it with it's key. Note, that such transaction can contain other actions toward user's account (for example calling a function).

Reviewer 4: Just to clarify, do you mean here that the protocol specifies that for meta transactions, the `actions` field is a singleton that consists of one `DelegateAction`? In other words, if a transaction contains more than one action and one of them is `DelegateAction`, then this transaction is invalid

Reviewer 5: Not sure if that was the goal, but I don't think having this as a singleton is mandatory.

>  - Relayer forms a `Transaction` with `receiver_id` equal to the user's account and `actions: [DelegateAction { ... }]`, and signs it with it's key. Note, that such transaction can contain other actions toward user's account (for example calling a function).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Relayer forms a `Transaction` with `receiver_id` equal to the user's account and `actions: [DelegateAction { ... }]` and signs it with it's key. Note that such transactions can contain other actions toward user's account (for example calling a function).
```

>  - This transaction is processed normally, by creating a receipt with copy of the all the actions into the `Receipt`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - This transaction is processed normally.  A `Receipt` is created with a copy of the actions in the transaction.
```

>  - When processing `DelegateAction` a number of checks are done (see below), mainly `signature` matching user account's key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - When processing a `DelegateAction`, a number of checks are done (see below), mainly a check to ensure that the `signature` matches the user account's key.
```

>  - When such `Receipt` with valid `DelegateAction` in actions arrives to the user's account it gets executed. The executed means creation of a new Receipt with `receiver_id: AccountId`, `actions: Action` matching `receiver_id` and `actions` inside `DelegateAction`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - When a `Receipt` with a valid `DelegateAction` in actions arrives at the user's account, it gets executed. Execution means creation of a new Receipt with `receiver_id: AccountId` and `actions: Action` matching `receiver_id` and `actions` in the `DelegateAction`. 
```

>  - The new `Receipt` looks like normal receipt that would have been originating from user's account, with `predeccessor_id` equal to user's account.

Reviewer 2: It's unclear what `signer_id` should be equal to. According to the discussion in https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/7497 it should be equal to Relayer's account.

Reviewer 5: Please note that using `signer_id` should be considered unsafe most of the time. See this comment for the equivalent in Ethereum: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues/683#issue-162203204.

---
Having said that I think signer_id should be the account that is paying for the attached balance (not gas), and if I understand correctly it is not the relayer, but the user signing the transaction.

>  - The new `Receipt` looks like normal receipt that would have been originating from user's account, with `predeccessor_id` equal to user's account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - The new `Receipt` looks like a normal receipt that could have originated from the user's account, with `predeccessor_id` equal to user's account.
```

### DelegateAction

> Delegate action allows for an account to initiate a batch of actions on behalf of the receiving account, allowing to proxy actions. This is used in implementation of meta transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delegate actions allows for an account to initiate a batch of actions on behalf of a receiving account, allowing proxy actions. This can be used to implement meta transactions.
```

```rust

> pub struct DelegateAction {

Reviewer 3: do we plan to add DelegateAction to the Action enum?

    /// Receiver of the delegated actions.
    receiver_id: AccountId,
    /// List of actions to be executed.

>     actions: Vec<Action>,

Reviewer 2: `Vec<Action>` here leads to a type recursion:
```
pub struct Transaction {
   ....
   pub actions: Vec<Action>, // <--- Recursion
}

pub enum Action {
   ...
   Delegate(DelegateAction),
}

pub struct DelegateAction {
   ...
   pub actions: Vec<Action>, /// <--- Recursion
}
```

Reviewer 5: It is acceptable in this context because an Action can't refer to itself or an ancestor, so recursion is finite.

Reviewer 2: I meant, rust compiler would not compile such code because of the recursion.
Example code in playground: https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=a6c54d6ed7588eb03d2ad19da1c0a9c6

Reviewer: Indeed, a common way to prevent this recursion is to use a `Box`.  As an example, a singly-linked list in Rust can be represented as:
```
struct Node<T> {
    element: T,
    next: Option<Box<Node<T>>>,
}
```

https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=14f24298eee755a2a08c7b5b66d8b4fa suggests a fix.

Reviewer 2: You are right. When I wrote my comment, I didn't know that Borsh supported `Box`. But there is another issue with this structure: Borsh doesn't support a recursive types https://github.com/near/borsh-rs/pull/96

 
    /// Public key that is used to sign this delegated action.
    signer_pk: PublicKey,

>     /// Nonce is used to determine that the same delegate action is not sent twice by relayers and should match for given account's `signer_pk`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Nonce to ensure that the same delegate action is not sent twice by a relayer and should match for given account's `signer_pk`.  
```

    /// After this action is processed it will increment.
    nonce: Nonce,
    /// Signature of the originating user signing `DelegateActionMessage` formed out of the data in the `DelegateAction`.
    signature: Signature,
}
```

>  Supporting a batch of `actions` means `DelegateAction` can initiate a complex steps like creating a new account and transferring funds, deploying a contract and executing an initialization function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Supporting batches of `actions` means `DelegateAction` can be used initiate a complex steps like creating new accounts, transferring funds, deploying contracts, and executing an initialization function all within the same transaction.
```

***Validation***:

> To ensure that `DelegateAction` is correct, on receival the verification of signature is done: `verify_signature(hash(message), signer_pk, signature)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure that a `DelegateAction` is correct, on receipt the following signature verification is performed: `verify_signature(hash(message), signer_pk, signature)`.
```

> The `message` is formed in the next format and must be signed by the user:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `message` is formed in the following format and it must be signed by the user:
```

```rust
struct DelegateActionMessage {

>     /// If not None, should match the `predecessor_id` that have created `DelegateAction`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// If not None, then should match the `predecessor_id` that created the `DelegateAction`.
```

    sender_id: Option<AccountId>,

>     /// Matching the given account_id.

Reviewer: Can you specify the "given account_id" here please?

    signer_id: AccountId,

>     /// Matching the `signer_pk` from `DelegateAction`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Should match the `signer_pk` from the `DelegateAction`.
```

    public_key: PublicKey,

>     /// Nonce for the given `public_key` from `DelegateAction`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Nonce for the given `public_key` from the `DelegateAction`.
```

    nonce: Nonce,

>     /// Matching the `receiver_id` from `DelegateAction`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Should match the `receiver_id` from the `DelegateAction`.
```

    receiver_id: AccountId,

>     /// Block hash to ensure validity.

Reviewer: The field appears to be missing?

Reviewer 3: yes ! as this struct was supposed to be similar to the 'Transaction' struct - it should have a 'block_hash' field here.

>     /// Actions matching `actions` from `DelegateAction`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Should match `actions` from the `DelegateAction`.
```

    actions: Vec<Action>,
}
```

The next set of security concerns are addressed by this format:

>  - If format matches `Transaction`, the relayer can just send it directly, not receiving payment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - If format matches `Transaction`, then the relayer can just send it directly, not receiving payment.
```

>  - Because set of actions can include pay back to the relayer (for example by paying in FT), the `sender_id` is added directly into the message to ensure that nobody else can send this message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Because the set of actions can include payment for the relayer (for example in FT), the `sender_id` is added directly into the message to ensure that nobody else can send this message.
```

>  - `nonce` is included to ensure that this message can't be replayed again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `nonce` is included to ensure that a message can not be replayed.
```

 - `public_key` and `signer_id` are needed to ensure the on the right account, work across rotating keys and fetch correct `nonce`.

> The permissions are verified based on kind `AccessKeyPermission` of `signer_pk`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The permissions are verified based on the variant of `signer_pk`:
```

 - `AccessKeyPermission::FullAccess`, all actions are allowed.
 - `AccessKeyPermission::FunctionCall`, only a single `FunctionCall` action is allowed in `actions`. 
    - `DelegateAction.receiver_id` must match to the `account[public_key].receiver_id`
    - `DelegateAction.actions[0].method_name` must be in the `account[public_key].method_names`

***Outcomes***:

> - If `signature` matches receiver's accounts `signer_pk`, new receipt is created from this account with set of `ActionReceipt { receiver_id, action }` for each item in `actions`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the `signature` matches the receiver's account's `signer_pk`, a new receipt is created from this account with a set of `ActionReceipt { receiver_id, action }` for each action in `actions`. 
```

#### Errors

**Validation Error**

> - If `signer_pk` does not exist for the given account, the following error will be returned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the `signer_pk` does not exist for the given account, the following error will be returned
```

```rust

> /// Signer key for delegate action is missing from given account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/// Signer key for delegate action is missing from the given account
```

DelegateActionSignerDoesNotExist
```

> - If `nonce` does not exist match `signer_pk` for  `receiver_id`, the following error will be returned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the `nonce` does not exist match the `signer_pk` for  the `receiver_id`, the the following error will be returned
```

```rust
/// Nonce must be account[signer_pk].nonce + 1

> DelegateActionInvalidNonce

Reviewer 4: Why do we enforce `+1` here? That is not how access key works in other cases

Reviewer 5: Can you share a reference about how nonces work today? I can't find it in nomicon.

```

> - If `signature` does not match to the data and `signer_pk` of the given key, the following error will be returned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the `signature` does not match the data and the `signer_pk` of the given key, then the following error will be returned
```

```rust
/// Signature does not match the provided actions and given signer public key.
DelegateActionInvalidSignature
```

See the [DelegateAction specification](specs/RuntimeSepc/Actions.md#DelegateAction) for details.

## Security Implications

> Delegate actions do not override `signer_pk`, leaving that to the original signer that initiated transaction (eg relayer in meta transaction case). Although it is possible to override `signer_pk` in the context with one from `DelegateAction`, there is no clear value to do that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delegate actions do not override `signer_pk`, leaving that to the original signer that initiated transaction (e.g. the relayer in the meta transaction case). Although it is possible to override the `signer_pk` in the context with one from the `DelegateAction`, there is no clear value in that.
```

> See ***Validation*** section in [DelegateAction specification](specs/RuntimeSepc/Actions.md#DelegateAction) for security considerations around what user signs and validation of actions with different permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the ***Validation*** section in [DelegateAction specification](specs/RuntimeSepc/Actions.md#DelegateAction) for security considerations around what the user signs and the validation of actions with different permissions.
```

## Drawbacks

> Increases complexity of the the NEAR's transactional model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Increases complexity of NEAR's transactional model.
```

> Meta transactions take an extra block to execute, as they first need to be included by the originating account, then routed to the delegate account and only after that to the real destination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Meta transactions take an extra block to execute, as they first need to be included by the originating account, then routed to the delegate account, and only after that to the real destination.
```

Delegate actions are not programmable as they require having signatures. Original proposal contained a new `AccessKey` kind that would support programmable delegated actions. On the other hand, that would be limiting without programmability of smart contracts, hence that idea evolved into [Account Extensions](https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/346).

## Future possibilities

> Supporting ZK proofs instead of just signatures can allow for an anonymous transactions, which pay fees to relayers in anonymous way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supporting ZK proofs instead of just signatures can allow for anonymous transactions, which pay fees to relayers anonymously.
```

DelegateActionInvalidSignature
```

- If the `sender_id` doesn't match the `tx.receiver_id`
```rust
/// Receiver of the transaction doesn't match Sender of the delegate action
DelegateActionSenderDoesNotMatchReceiver
```

- If the current block is equal or greater than `max_block_height`
```rust
/// Delegate action has expired
DelegateActionExpired
```

- If the `public_key` does not exist for Sender account
```rust
/// The given public key doesn't exist for Sender account
DelegateActionAccessKeyError
```

- If the `nonce` does match the `public_key` for the `sender_id`
```rust
/// Nonce must be greater sender[public_key].nonce
DelegateActionInvalidNonce
```

- If `nonce` is too large
```rust
/// DelegateAction nonce is larger than the upper bound given by the block height (block_height * 1e6)
DelegateActionNonceTooLarge
```

- If the list of delegated actions contains another `DelegateAction`
```rust
/// DelegateAction actions contain another DelegateAction
DelegateActionCantContainNestedOne
```

- If the list of Transaction actions contains several `DelegateAction`
```rust
/// There should be the only one DelegateAction

> DelegateActionMustBeOnlyOne

Reviewer 6: Curious why this is the case? I don't see the reasoning in this doc; sorry if I skimmed over it. This seems like a benefit to have to be able to schedule multiple meta transactions within a single transaction, to minimize costs for the relayer.

If you actually want this to be the only thing executed within the transaction, should regular actions not be allowed with a delegate action? Currently, the draft implementation seems to allow other actions with a delegate action, and I just want to make sure this is intended

Reviewer 2: I added this case for two reasons:
1. At this moment all actions in the  transaction are executed in one by one. But in case of `DelegateAction`, they will be executed in parallel (inner actions will be executed in parallel). I think such behavior might be confusing for developer/users.
2. For code simplification. If we allow several `DelegateAction` in a transaction, we should decide how limits should be handled. For example there is the limit for total number of actions in the transactions. Should it be shared between `DelegateAction` and the transaction or we need to define a new limit for number of actions in `DelegateAction`?

[Aurora Plus](https://aurora.plus) has shown viability of the relayers that can offer some number of free transactions and a subscription model. Shifting the complexity of dealing with fees to the infrastructure from the user space.

## Rationale and alternatives

Proposed here design provides the easiest for users and developers way to onboard and pay for user transactions.
There is no requirement on the user account, including user account may not even exist on chain and implicit account can be used.

An alterantive is a proxy contracts deployed on the user account. 
This design has severe limitations as it requires user to deploy such contract and additional costs for storage.

## Specification

Next changes to protocol are required:
 - New Action kind: `DelegateAction(receiver_id, Action, signer_pk, signature)`
 - On conversion to Receipt, such action is sent as `DelegateAction` to the `receiver_id`.
 - On processing Receipt, it verifies the `signature` over the given account and `signer_pk`. Unwraps into `receiver_id: AccountId`, `action: Action` inside into new Receipt with given `receiver_id` and `action`. This means that `predeccessor_id` of such action has been overriden.

> 

Reviewer 4: This part needs to be expanded on how it works in details. Today when we convert a transaction to a receipt, we directly clone the actions from the transaction https://github.com/near/nearcore/blob/b6b9135e847b9e0070af77bde8caed62ee4c7e57/runtime/runtime/src/lib.rs#L217 and that won't work here. Meta transaction needs to have a separate logic that instead of clone what the `actions` field inside a transaction, it unwraps the transaction and construct a new receipt with actions **inside** the `DelegateAction` action. This means likely we should not allow `DelegateAction` to be mixed with other actions in the same transaction. It almost feels to me that we should make `actions` an enum
```rust
pub enum Actions {
     // regular transaction
     RegularActions(Vec<Action>),
     // meta transaction
     DelegateAction { ...}
}
```
to make it easier to process at runtime

Author: The flow is next:
 - User signs `DelegatedActionMessage` and sends to relayer
 - Relayer send `Transaction { ... actions: [DelegatedAction { ... }] }`
 - Transaction gets converted into Receipt with a copy of `DelegatedAction { ... }` out of actions. Note that other actions can be before or after this one, for example if the receiver account has a contract and some function needs to be called  first, that is also possible.
 - The Receipt with `DelegatedAction` arrives to the recipient account and gets converted into regular actions per described rules in the spec.

Hence the direct cloning of actions from Transaction works as expected. The conversion happens on the processing of `DelegateAction` state already on the recipient account.

I'll add this to the proposal so it's clearer.

See the [DelegateAction specification](specs/RuntimeSepc/Actions.md#DelegateAction) for details.

## Security Implications

Delegate actions do not override `signer_pk`, leaving that to the original signer that initiated transaction (eg relayer in meta transaction case). Although it is possible to override `signer_pk` in the context with one from `DelegateAction`, there is no clear value to do that.

See ***Validation*** section in [DelegateAction specification](specs/RuntimeSepc/Actions.md#DelegateAction) for security considerations around what user signs and validation of actions with different permissions.

## Drawbacks

> Increases complexity of the NEAR's transactional model.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Increases complexity of NEAR's transactional model.
```

Meta transactions take an extra block to execute, as they first need to be included by the originating account, then routed to the delegate account and only after that to the real destination.

> Delegate actions are not programmable as they require having signatures. Original proposal contained a new `AccessKey` kind that would support programmable delegated actions. On the other hand, that would be limiting without progamability of smart contracts, hence that idea evolved into [Account Extensions](https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/0000).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Delegate actions are not programmable as they require having signatures. Original proposal contained a new `AccessKey` kind that would support programmable delegated actions. On the other hand, that would be limiting without programmability of smart contracts, hence that idea evolved into [Account Extensions](https://github.com/nearprotocol/neps/pull/0000).
```

Reviewer 4: @ilblackdragon the link for account extensions doesn't exist

## Future possibilities

> Supporting ZK proofs instead of just signatures can allow for anonymous transactions, which pay fees to relayers in anonymous way.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Supporting ZK proofs instead of just signatures can allow for anonymous transactions, which pay fees to relayers in an anonymous way.
```

Reviewer 8: It's better to say "in a confidential way". If we are talking about anonymity, then ring signatures could be applied. Please excuse (and correct me) if I misunderstood and the above does not make sense.

Author: The difference between two is not that big in case of ZK based pools.
External observer can not tell who is transacting with whom. As a receiver or sender you also do not know how much the other party has transacted and owns. Due to that you are able to send and receive payments from anonymous parties.
